Rewrite: Specificity (#17089)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/specificity/index.md

  - Guide
  - Reference
  - Web
---
{{CSSRef}}

**Specificity** is the algorithm by which browsers decide which CSS property style declaration is the most relevant to an element and, therefore, which property values will be applied. The specificity algorithm calculates [CSS selector](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference#selectors) weight to determine which rule from competing style declarations gets applied to an element. 

> Specificity is considered **after** determining [cascade origin and importance](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Cascade). In other words, for competing property declarations, specifity is only relevant and compared between selectors from the one [cascade origin and layer](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer) that has precedence for the property. Order of appearance becomes relevant when the selector specificity of the competing declarations in the cascade layer with precedence are equal.

Author: fixed

### Inline styles

Inline styles added to an element (e.g., `style="font-weight: bold;"`) always overwrite any normal styles in author stylesheets, and therefore, can be thought of as having the highest specificity. Think of inline styles as having a specificity weight of `1-0-0-0`.

The only way to override inline styles is by using `!important`.

Many JavaScript frameworks and libraries add inline styles. Using `!important` with a very targeted selector, such as an attribute selector using the inline style, is one way to override these inline styles. 

```html
<p style="color: purple">
```

```css
p[style*="purple"] { color: rebeccapurple; }
``` 

Make sure to include a comment with every inclusion of the important flag so code maintainers understand why a CSS anti-pattern was used.

### The `!important` exception

CSS declarations marked as important override any other declarations within the same cascade layer and origin. Although technically, [`!important`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/important) has nothing to do with specificity, it interacts directly with specificity and the cascade. It reverses the [cascade](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Cascade) order of stylesheets. 

> If declarations from the same origin and cascade layer conflict, if one property value has the `!important` flag set, the important declaration is applied no matter the specificity. When conflicting declarations from the same origin and cascade layer with the `!important` flag are applied to the same element, the declaration with a greater specificity is applied. 

Author: ```suggestion
If declarations from the same origin and cascade layer conflict and one property value has the `!important` flag set, the important declaration is applied no matter the specificity. When conflicting declarations from the same origin and cascade layer with the `!important` flag are applied to the same element, the declaration with a greater specificity is applied. 
```

```html
<main id="myContent">
  <h1>Text</h1>
</main>
```

```css
#myContent h1 { color: green; /* 1-0-1 */}
[id="myContent"] h1 { color: yellow; /* 0-1-1 */}
:where(#myContent) h1 { color: blue;  /* 0-0-1 */}
```

No matter the order, the heading will be green because that rule is the most specific.

#### Reducing ID specificity

Specificity is based on the form of a selector.  Including the `id` of an element as an attribute selector rather than an id selector is a good way to make an element more specific without adding an overabundance of specificity. In the previous example, the selector `[id="myContent"]` counts as an attribute selector for the purpose of determining the selector's specificity, even though it selects an ID.

You can also include the `id` or any part of a selector as a parameter in the `:where()` specificity-adjustment pseudo class if you need to make a selector more specific but don't want to add any specificity at all. 

### Increasing specifity by duplicating selectors

> As a special case for increasing specificity duplicating weights from the _CLASS_ or _ID_ columns. Duplicating simple selectors will increase specificity when overriding very specific selectors over which you have no control. 

Author: ```suggestion
As a special case for increasing specificity, you can duplicate weights from the _CLASS_ or _ID_ columns. Duplicating simple selectors will increase specificity when overriding very specific selectors over which you have no control. 
```

  - Guide
  - Reference
  - Web

> spec-urls: https://drafts.csswg.org/selectors/#specificity-rules

Reviewer: If you remove this line you must remove the _Specifications_ section at the botton.

While removing it?

Author: put it back in

{{CSSRef}}

**Specificity** is the algorithm used by browsers to determine the [CSS declaration](/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/First_steps/What_is_CSS#css_syntax) that is the most relevant to an element, which in turn, determines the property value to apply to the element. The specificity algorithm calculates the weight of a [CSS selector](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Reference#selectors) to determine which rule from competing CSS declarations gets applied to an element. 

> > Note: Browsers consider specificity **after** determining [cascade origin and importance](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Cascade). In other words, for competing property declarations, specificity is relevant and compared only between selectors from the one [cascade origin and layer](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer) that has precedence for the property. Order of appearance becomes relevant when the selector specificity of the competing declarations in the cascade layer with precedence are equal.

Reviewer: We need to put _Note:_ in bold. This also triggers Yari to add the right class to the HTML generated from Markdown.

I also fixed a minor grammar error.

```suggestion
> **Note:** Browsers consider specificity **after** determining [cascade origin and importance](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Cascade). In other words, for competing property declarations, specificity is relevant and compared only between selectors from the one [cascade origin and layer](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer) that has precedence for the property. Order of appearance becomes relevant when the selector specificities of the competing declarations in the cascade layer with precedence are equal.
```

- ID column
  - : Includes only [ID selectors](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/ID_selectors), such as `#example`. For each ID in a matching selector, add 1-0-0 to the weight value.
- CLASS column
  - : Includes [class selectors](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Class_selectors), such as `.myClass`, attribute selectors like `[type="radio"]` and `[lang|="fr"]`, and pseudo-classes, such as `:hover`, `:nth-of-type(3n)`, and `:required`. For each class, attribute selector, or pseudo-class in a matching selector, add 0-1-0 to the weight value.
- TYPE column
  - : Includes [type selectors](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Type_selectors), such as `p`, `h1`, and `td`,  and pseudo-elements like `::before`, `::placeholder`, and all other selectors with double-colon notation. For each type or pseudo-element in a matching selector, add 0-0-1 to the weight value.
- No value
  - : The universal selector ({{CSSxRef("Universal_selectors", "*")}}) and the pseudo-class {{CSSxRef(":where", ":where()")}} and its parameters aren't counted when calculating the weight, but they do match elements. The value for both the universal selector and the pseudo-class is 0-0-0; these selectors do not impact the specificity weight value.

> Combinators, such as {{CSSxRef("Adjacent_sibling_combinator", "+")}}, {{CSSxRef("Child_combinator", "&gt;")}}, {{CSSxRef("General_sibling_combinator", "~")}}, [" "](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Descendant_combinator), and {{CSSxRef("Column_combinator", "||")}}, may make a selector more specific but don't add any value to the specificity weight. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand here: _may make a selector more specific but don't add any value to the the specificity weight_. Okay, but how does they make a selector more specific?

Author: edited to read "more specific in what is selected"

> The negation pseudo-class, {{CSSxRef(":not", ":not()")}},  itself has no weight. Neither does the {{CSSxRef(":is", ":is()")}} pseudo-class. The parameters in these selectors, however, do. The values of both come from the parameter in the list of parameters that has the highest specificity. The [`:not()` and `:is()` exceptions](#the-is-and-not-exceptions) are discussed below.

Reviewer: Nit:
```suggestion
The negation pseudo-class, {{CSSxRef(":not", ":not()")}}, itself has no weight. Neither does the {{CSSxRef(":is", ":is()")}} pseudo-class. The parameters in these selectors, however, do. The values of both come from the parameter in the list of parameters that has the highest specificity. The [`:not()` and `:is()` exceptions](#the-is-and-not-exceptions) are discussed below.
```

When two selectors from different layers match the same element, origin and importance take precendence; the specificity of the selector in the losing stylesheet is irrelevant.

```html
<style>
  @import TW.css layer();
  p, p * {
    font-size: 1rem;
  }
</style>
```

In the above example, all paragraph text, including the nested content, will be `1rem` no matter how many class names the paragraphs have that match the TW stylesheet.

### Avoiding and overriding `!important`

The best approach is to not use `!important`. The above explanations on specificity should be helpful in avoiding using the flag and removing it altogether when encountered. 

To remove the perceived need for `!important`, you can do one of the following:

- Increase the specificity of the selector of the formerly `!important` declaration so that it is greater than other declarations
- Give it the same specificity and put it after the declaration it is meant to override
- Reduce the specificity of the selector you are trying to override.

All these methods are covered in preceding sections. 

 

> When unable to remove `!important` flags from an authors style sheet, the only solution to overriding the important styles is by using `!important`. Creating a [cascade layer](../@layer/) of important declaration overrides is an excellent solution. Two ways of doing this include:

Author: ```suggestion
If you're unable to remove `!important` flags from an authors style sheet, the only solution to overriding the important styles is by using `!important`. Creating a [cascade layer](../@layer/) of important declaration overrides is an excellent solution. Two ways of doing this include:
```

Method #1

  1. Create a separate, short style sheet containing only important declarations specifically overriding any important declarations you were unable to remove. 
  2. Import this stylesheet as the first import in your CSS using `layer()`, including the `@import` statement, before linking to other stylesheets. This is to ensure that the important overrides is imported as the first layer. 

```html
<style>
  @import importantOverrides.css layer();
</style>
````

Method #2

1. At the beginning of your stylesheet declarations, create a named cascade layer, like so:

```css
@layer importantOverrides;
```
  
2. Each time you need to override an important declaration, declare it within the named layer. Only declare important rules within the layer. 
  
 ```css

>  [id="myElement] p {

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure, but I think it should be:
```suggestion
 [id="myElement"] p {
```

   /* normal styles here */
 }
 @layer importantOverrides {

>     [id="myElement] p {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [id="myElement"] p {
```

      /* important style here */;
    }
 }
```
  

> The specificity of the selector of the important style within the layer can be low, as long as it matches the element you are trying to override. Normal layers should be declared outside the layer as layered styles have lower precedence than unlayered styles.

Author: ```suggestion
The specificity of the selector of the important style within the layer can be low, as long as it matches the element you are trying to override. Normal layers should be declared outside the layer because layered styles have lower precedence than unlayered styles.
```

}
```

> The `h1` elements will be purple because when declarations have the same specificity, the last declared selector has precedence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `<h1>` elements will be purple because when declarations have the same specificity, the last declared selector has precedence.
```

</html>
```

The `h1` will be purple because the `h1` selector targets the element specifically, while the green is inherited from the `#parent` declarations.

## Examples

### Basic example

```css
#myElement input.myClass { color: red; } /* 1-1-1 */
input[type="password"]:required { color: blue; } /* 0-2-1 */
html body main input { color: green; }  /* 0-0-4 */
```

If the above selectors all target the same input, the input will be red, as the first declaration has the highest value in the _ID_ column. 

> The last selector has four type components. While it has the highest integer value, no matter how many type components are included, even if there were 150, type components never have precedence over a class selectors. The column values are compared starting from the left and moving right when column values are equal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last selector has four _TYPE_ components. While it has the highest integer value, no matter how many type components are included, even if there were 150, type components never have precedence over _CLASS_ selectors. The column values are compared from left to right when column values are equal.
```

If we convert the id selector to an attribute selector, the first two selectors have the same specificity:

```css
[id="myElement"] input.myClass { color: red; }   /* 0-2-1 */
input[type="password"]:required { color: blue; } /* 0-2-1 */
```

> When multiple declarations have equal specificity, the last declaration found in the CSS is applied to the element. Specificity only applies when the same element is targeted by multiple declarations in a cascade layer or origin. As per CSS rules, [directly targeted elements](#directly_targeted_elements_vs._inherited_styles) will always take precedence over rules which an element inherits from its ancestor.

Reviewer 2: This should be converted to text that's specific to the example. Like, "In this example, both the declarations have equal specificity, so the last declaration found in the CSS is applied to the element."

It might be better to move this para elsewhere on the page where specificity is being defined: "Specificity only applies when the same element is targeted by multiple declarations in a cascade layer or origin. As per CSS rules, [directly targeted elements](#directly_targeted_elements_vs._inherited_styles) will always take precedence over rules which an element inherits from its ancestor."

> **Note:** [Proximity of elements](#tree_proximity_ignorance) in the document tree has no effect on the specificity.

> > **Note:** Specificity only matters for declarations of the same importance and same origin and cascade layer. If matching selectors are in different origins, the [cascade](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Cascade) determines which declaration takes precedence.  

Reviewer 2: This looks like it could be moved closer to the intro paras

</html>
```

The `h1` will be purple because the `h1` selector targets the element specifically, while the green is inherited from the `#parent` declarations.

## Examples

> ### Basic example

Author: ```suggestion
In the following CSS, we have three selectors targeting {{HTMLElement('input') elements to set a color. For a given input, the specificity weight of the color declaration having precedence is the matching selector with the greatest weight:

```css
#myElement input.myClass { color: red; } /* 1-1-1 */
input[type="password"]:required { color: blue; } /* 0-2-1 */
html body main input { color: green; }  /* 0-0-4 */
```

If the above selectors all target the same input, the input will be red, as the first declaration has the highest value in the _ID_ column. 

> The last selector has four type components. While it has the highest integer value, no matter how many type components are included, even if there were 150, type components never have precedence over a class selectors. The column values are compared starting from the left and moving right when column values are equal.

Author: ```suggestion
The last selector has four _TYPE_ components. While it has the highest integer value, no matter how many elements and pseudo-elements are included, even if there were 150, TYPE components never have precedence over _CLASS_ components. The column values are compared starting from left to right when column values are equal.
```

```

When multiple declarations have equal specificity, the last declaration found in the CSS is applied to the element. If both selectors match the same {{HTMLElement('input')}}, the color will be blue.

## Additional notes

A few things to remember about specificity:

1. Specificity only applies when the same element is targeted by multiple declarations in the same cascade layer or origin. Specificity only matters for declarations of the same importance and same origin and [cascade layer](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer). If matching selectors are in different origins, the [cascade](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Cascade) determines which declaration takes precedence. 

2. When two selectors in the the same cascade layer and origin have the same specificity, proximity is important; the last selector wins.

3. As per CSS rules, [directly targeted elements](#directly_targeted_elements_vs._inherited_styles) will always take precedence over rules which an element inherits from its ancestor.

4. [Proximity of elements](#tree_proximity_ignorance) in the document tree has no effect on the specificity.

## Specifications

{{Specifications}}

## See also

- {{CSS_Key_Concepts}}

> - "Specificity" in "Cascade and inheritance"](/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/Cascade_and_inheritance#specificity_2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Specificity" in "Cascade and inheritance"](/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Building_blocks/Cascade_and_inheritance#specificity_2)
```

- [SpeciFISHity](https://specifishity.com)

> - Specificity Calculator: An interactive website to test and understand your own CSS rules - <https://specificity.keegan.st/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Specificity Calculator](https://specificity.keegan.st/): An interactive website to test and understand your own CSS rules
```
